Khan Academy, high school biology

life sciences = biology ?

biology
systems
nervous
motor
sensory
endocrine

body: cells, tissues, organs, organ systems

homeostatis = the tendancy to resist change in order to maintain a stable, relatively constant internal environment. Body temperature, blood glucose, various pH levels per organ, ion concentrations in each cell.

homeostatic circuits 
most homeostatic circuits are negative feedback loops
some biological systems use positive feedback loops

feedback loop
	negative: conteract change, maintain the status quo, like keeping body temperature constant
	positive: promote change, push a process to completion, like childbirth

organ systems:
skeletal
muscular
digestive
excretory
circulatory
respiratory
immune
reproductive
lymphatic
urinary



biology
psychology

archetypes: jung vs myss
Jordon Peterson's sub-personalities

myss "survival" archetypes
child
victim
prostitute
saboteur

emotions - facial expressions
traits - emotional memories, tendancy
archetypes - response to stimulus

nervous system
	central
		brain
			organization
				cerebrum
				brain stem
					midbrain
					pons
					medula oblongata
				cerebellum
			organization by fetal development
				forebrain -> cerebrum
				midbrain -> midbrain
				hindbrain -> pons, medula, cerebellum
			organization by hemisphere
				right
				left
		spinal column
			nerves.  nerves carry the axons of neurons
			ganglion, ganglia.  lumps attached to nerves. contain the somas of neurons.
			neuron: axon, ganglion, 
	periphal
		nerves
			cranial 12 pairs (right and left)
			spinal 31 pairs
		neurons 
			structural organization
				afferant (Motor) - leading away from central, enter spinal column at roots in the back
				efferant (sensory) - leading towards central, enter spinal column at roots in the front
				interneuron - connecting neurons within brain and spinal column

Most of the time, you'll want affect as a verb meaning to influence something and effect for the something that was influenced. The difference between affect and effect is so slippery that people have started using "impact" as a verb instead.

		nerves branch out repeatedly
		proximal - near the center of the body, big, visible
		distal - distant from the center, microscopic
		
		functional
			autonomic
			somatic
		
		neuron
			one cell
			soma (body)
			nucleus
			dendrites - receive a signal
			axon - transmits a signal
			terminal - end of the axon (look like more dendrites)
			axon hillock - where the axon leaves the soma
		myelin sheath - collection of Schwann cells
			Schwann cells - insulating cells around the axon
			nodes of Ranvier - spaces between the Schwann cells in the myelin sheath
		
		signals on the dendrites, summed up at the hillock, if large enough a signal passes to the axon and at the terminal jumps across a synapse to another neuron or to a muscle
		
Endocrinology, the study of hormones
hormone - greek meaning "arouse the activity"
chemical messengers, made in one part of the body, go to another part of the body to arouse the activity, traveling in the blood
endocrine hormones - work at a distance
paracrine hormones - work regionally
autocrine hormones - work locally, made in one cell, act on the same cell or the one next door

pituitary gland, master gland, makes hormones that work on other organs
	1. thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) which travels to the thyroid and causes it to release thyroid hormones which regulate metabolism, appetite, thermogenesis, muscle function.
	hyperthyroidism - rapid heart rate, weight loss
	hypothyroidism
	pituitary gland can detect the level of thyroid hormones, and in a positive feedback loop, turn the release of TSH on and off to keep the correct level of thyroid hormones in the body.
	2. Adrenal Corticotrophic Hormone (ACTH), acts on the adrenal cortex.  Adrenal gland sits on top of the kidney (ad-renal, adjacent to renal. renal=related to the kidneys), has a large blood flow like the kidney, but not functionally related to the kidney. Stimulates adrenal glands to release adrenal hormones. 
		adrenal hormones:
		1) Cortisol, regulates glucose metabolism, maintains blood pressure and well-being.
		2) Mineralocorticoids, like aldosterone, regulates salt and water balance.
		3) Adrenal androgens
	3. lutianizing hormone (LH)
	4. follicle stimulating hormone (FSH)
	testes to produce sperm
	ovaries to produce oocytes (eggs)
	gonadol steroids, testosterone and estradiol/estrogen/progesterone
	5. human growth hormone (HGH), optimal growth of long bones
	6. prolactin, female lactation, breast-feeding

pancreas, regulates blood glucose by producing insulin and glucagon.  An organ about the size of the hand.  Contains islets of Langerhans, beta and alpha cells.  The beta cells produce insulin, the alpha cells produce glucagon.  Contains sensors which measure the blood glucose level.  Negative feedback loop: when blood glucose is too high, glycogen is released; when too low, insulin is released.
	insulin, triggers muscle and fat cells to take up glucose from the blood, and triggers the liver to remove gluclose from the blood by converting it to glycogen and storing it in the liver.
	glucagon, triggers liver to convert glycogen to glucose and release it into the blood.

Distributed Intelligence.  Who tells the pancreas what to do?  No one.  It operates on its own.
	
glands, like pancreas and adrenals, have veinous drainage. hormones produced into the blood.

hormone, chemical structure, various
	amino acid derived
	eicosanoid
	steroid - derived from cholesterol


Childbirth, positive feedback loop.  
	Head of baby pushes against cervix.
	Sensation of pressure sent to brain.
	Brain tells pituitary to release Oxytocin.
	Oxytocin tells uterus to contract.
	Uterine contractions increase the pressure on the cervix.
	loop

hypothalamus 
	gonadotropin releasing hormone (GNRH) - tells the pituitary to produce LH and FSH
	
limbic system
	sits on top of the brain stem
	scientists are divided on which components are included in the limbic system
	hypothalamus
	amygdala
	thalamus
	hippocampus

Thalamus, sensory relay station.  Information from the five senses comes to the thalamus where it is redirected to the appropriate area in the cortex and other areas of the brain.

Amygdala.
When stimulated: Anger, violence.  Fear, anxiety.
When destroyed: mellowing.  Kluver-Bucy syndrome. Hyperorality, hypersexuality, disinhibited behavior.

Hippocampus.  Copy short-term memory (STM) to long-term memory (LTM).  When destroyed, patient has old memories but cannot form new ones.

Hypothalamus.  Regulates Autonomic Nervous System (ANS).  Fight-flight vs rest-digest.
Regulates Epinephrine, aka adrenaline, norepinephrin.
Regulates basic drives: hunger, thirst, sleep, sex.

Left brain: positive emotions, sociable
Right brain: negative emotions, isolative

prefrontal cortex: 
higher order functions
language
information processing
solve math problems
think through philosophical issues

develops after birth
used to:
solve problems
make decisions
manage behavior in social situations
(When the amygdala feels anger, the cerebral cortex allows to you NOT react with violence.)

Phineas Gage, 1848, had his prefrontal cortex damaged.  Before, hardworking, well-liked guy.  After, rough, gruff, swearing, inappropriate.

What makes a human, human?  The prefrontal cortex.

ANS
	sympathetic nervous system
		fight or flight
		eye: pupils dilate
		salivary gland: decrease in salivation
		lungs: respiratory rate increases
		heart: heart rate increases
		liver: glucose released
		adrenal glands: epinephrine released
		gi tract: decrease in digestion
	parasympathetic nervous system
		rest and digest
		eye: pupils constrict
		salivary gland: increase in salivation
		lungs: respiratory rate decreases
		heart: heart rate decreases
		liver: glucose storage
		adrenal glands: epinephrine not released
		gi tract: increase in digestion

	
Emotion is a subjective experience accompanied by physiological, 
cognitive, and 
behavioral 
changes and reactions.

Paul Ekman, six emotions, based on facial expressions, consistent across cultures
happiness, sadness, fear, disgust, anger, surprise		
	
theories of emotion
James-Lange: event -> physiologic response -> emotion
Cannon-Bard: event -> physiologic, emotion
Shachter-Singer: event -> physiologic -> label -> emotion
Lazarus: event -> label -> physiologic, emotion
one event can produce different emotions
seeing a cat: fear or happiness
skydiving: fear or happiness

