affective determinants (i.e. motives, attitudes, moods, and emotions).

emotions facial expressions
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n8wJ8tjmnmU
neutral
happy
surprise
angry
disgust
fear
sad

They were very old and they had no human ties or affections.  They seemed to look upon the world with a humorous cynicism.  They had lived through every kind of illusion and held existence in a malicious and laughing contempt.  They had no tolerance for the follies of men and no indulgence for their weakness.  There was something vaguely frightening in their entire lack of attachment to human beings.  They had done with love, they had finished with the anguish of separation, death had no terrors for them, they had nothing left now but laughter.
Somerset Maughm: The Gentlemen in the Parlour, last paragraph Chapter IX
Brahmaputra 
Irrawaddy 
Salween
Mehkong
Flow from Tibet to Indian ocean

location of CMU gym
enter from the rear entrance off suthep road, make a right at the circle and they are close by.

I experience myself as the tip of a great iceberg of consciousness.
Do what you want to.
Slomo on facebook op-docs video.


Plato republic
Internal the man vs the government 

Secondhand Lions Speech,
we believe in things that are not necessarily true
https://youtu.be/y1-KbmIagFw

Agency 
Karma


Japanese forced British POW to build a railroad to Burma bridge
4000 died and are buried, some in Burma, some in Kanchanaburi

confluence of two rivers
Khwae Yai - River Kwai
Khwae Noi
combine into Mek Klong

https://goo.gl/maps/JR28B3QxKLp

จังหวัด กาญจนบุรี
Kanchanaburi Province

แม่น้ำ แคว
River Kwai

---------------------------

https://youtu.be/eOoPAcvkKQk
Forebrain
Midbrain
Hindbrain
Brainstem

Jordan Peterson
https://youtu.be/RdNJTP6tYMs
Gray: a model of the limbic system and basil ganglia
Swanson:
Expectancy models
Vinegranova
Sokolov
Gray

https://youtu.be/mQ3fe3vDQao
Discipline 
Voluntary subjugation
Compensate for neuroticism
Finely honed sword of discernment

https://youtu.be/wEdBgRWkF-I
IQ and big five

Men : antisocial personality disorder 
Women: borderline personality disorder 
Acting out disorders 
Impulsiveness
Idealization-devaluation
Abandonment
IQ, conscientiousness, zero correlation

Psychology and neurology,  two different sides of the model. 
Survive, reproduce, expand, know. 
Why know? Does it enhance our ability to survive, reproduce, expand? Is it itself a form of expansion? 
Expand,  contract. 
Survive,  fail. 
Reproduce,  stagnate. 
Survival is necessary only to promote reproduction. 

Mind body connection
Endrocrine
Neuro

Neurotransmitter travels through the nervous system. 
Hormone travels through the blood. Cortisol, made in the adrenal cortex. Adrenaline, made in the inside part of the adrenal gland. 

Autoimmune disease: rheumatoid,  MS,  lupus. Always occur after stress event: loss,  threat of loss,  divorce. 

Sympathetic nervous system 
Parasympathetic nervous system: rest, digestion. 
https://youtu.be/ii_OWTqn1rw

You see what you admire

Alternative model
The expansive self 

Hole in the mundane model.
The origin
First mover
Big bang
Give me one miracle and I can explain everything else scientifically.

Looking at the mundane model,  taking it to logical conclusions,  leads to nihilism. 
All roads lead to nihilism. 

Logical refutation of the mundane model. 
Alan Watts,  you cannot be separated from your environment .
Tolstoy,  no free will. 

Mundane
Autonomous robots,  the ego self is illusion
No objects.  Just colored water,  swishing in the wind. 
Who is swishing the water? 
Everything = something = nothing


Can should a robot go thru stages of life?
Aging
Natural selection

https://youtu.be/fkjwL6gnvoA
Complexity of hypothalamus and dna
video of dna fixing itself

National AI Policies
competition among nations
civil vs military
https://medium.com/politics-ai/an-overview-of-national-ai-strategies-2a70ec6edfd


Re: agency
Yes, I appear to hear and see and talk and act, but to me it just happens, as to you digestion or perspiration happens. The body mind machine looks after it, but leaves me out of it. Just as you do not need to worry about growing hair, so I need not worry about words and actions. They just happen and leave me unconcerned, for in my world nothing ever goes wrong.
— Nisargadatta Maharaj: I Am That

Reflex
Instinct
Intuition
Clairvoyance

Hypnotism as hacking
Programming

Bill Burr, Gold Digging Whores, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x0gaYyNk7QA
Bill Burr, How to argue, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PPi6WtcPljM
Ck Lewis, desire discrepancy
Patrice O'Neal
Kinnison
Bill Hicks

Will we have to tip autonomous Ubers

a repeating pattern: 
dna is complete blueprint
each cell knows where he is within the blueprint
so he knows how to build himself
like, in a hierarchical society, each individual knows his position, and how to function

forgiveness
As I walked out the door toward the gate that would lead to my freedom, I knew if I didn't leave my bitterness and hatred behind, I'd still be in prison. Nelson Mandela

forgiveness, see also the guy on Joe Rogan who was held by Somali pirates

ahimsa
forgiveness
Sabai
egoless, non-agency, non-free-will
	
They killed out of hatred, jealousy, greed, fear, envy...  Thomas Perry: Forty Thieves
