Sapolsky: 15. Human Sexual Behavior I 

Robert Sapolsky, Stanford

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LOY3QH_jOtE


Evolution of species\\
Evolution of population\\
Genetics \\
Perinatal bio\\
Perinatal ?\\
Chronic Hormonal \\
Cutton\\
Acute Hormones\\
Releasing Stimuli\\
Neurobio\\
Behavior\\

Why were they in such a hurry at the end?
Proximal explanation: it feels good
Distal explanation: hormones, nerve endings, stimuli, feedback loop, etc

close vs far

Proximal mechanisms: Releasing Stiumli and Neurobio
Distal mechanisms: evolution, perinatal bio, etc

highly conserved fixed action patterns across many species
most vertebrate species using
pelvic thrusting, 
orgasms,
ejaculation,
lordotic reflex (lordosis, presenting, bending backward)

selectivity within species

chaining of behavior and releasing stimuli
male behavior stimulates female behavior which stimulates male behavior which stimulates...

libido, arousal, motivation

attractivity, proceptivity, receptivity

motivation, performance

female orgasm
shared by other primates
not necessary for conception but may increase likelihood of
facilitates fertilization 
1. increased vaginal fluids increases motility of sperm
2. exhausts the female leaving her horizontal 
3. feels good so more likely to do it again
but, no correlation between fertility of a woman and her propensity for orgasm

spandrel - a feature arising a byproduct rather than an adaptation, with no clear benefit for fitness and survival

orgasm is a spandrel in women
nipples are a spandrel in men

human specializations
are these things unique to humans:
non-reproductive sex: humans, bonobos, dolphins
foreplay
homosexuality
egalitarian sex (in many species, only one male and one female are chosen for reproduction)
private - in no other species is the majority of sexual behavior done in private
confusing sex with aggression or violence
masturbation
fantasizing - we have no way to know whether other species fantasize
marriage - universal across human cultures. some other species have monogamous pair-bonding. Humans have social monogamy but not sexual monogamy. between 10 and 40% of children are fathered by someone other than the sperm donor.
cheating
romance - new, 3 or 4 centures
that romance should persist throughout a marriage - novel concept, 30 or 40 years old
divorce - average marriage across all cultures: 2 to 4 years, 2 to 4 years is the period of children being dependent on a high degree of parenting, and is the interbirth interval
serial monogamy - with the lag time between relationships equal to the interbirth interval

non-human specializations
hermaphrodite
an individual changes sex opportunistically
parthenogenic - an individual reproduces without the benefit of anyone else's genetic input

Gender Differences
1. brain regions preferentially involved differs between genders

females hotspots
ventral medial hypothalamus - receptors for estrogen, progesterone, 
midbrain
spinal column - the lordotic reflex is exclusive to females

male hotspots
medial preoptic area (of the hypothalamus), receptors for testosterone, androgen. sexual performance 
amygdala - sexual motivation (how are sexual motivation and aggression related?)
autonomic nervous system
parasympathetic nervous system establishes the erection, 
sympathetic nervous system needed for ejaculation
same for female clitoral erection
slower recovery time in females than males
vascular erection (human, longer)
muscular erection (rat, faster)

2. brain regions differ in size per gender
sexual dimorphism 
INAH Cluster of Nucleii in the Hypothalamus, twice the size in men, statistically significant

Same in both genders

Male and female orgasm

problems in males, too rapid transition from parasympathetic to sympathetic (premature ejaculation)

problems in females, failure of transition from parasympathetic to sympathetic (no orgasm).  Is this a pathology, or a normal human variability?

Neurobiology of Pleasure, Anticipation, Reward

Dopamine - identical role in both sexes, huge role

Dopamine path: from Ventral Tegmental area to nucleus sucumbens to many places in the brain

If this path is depleted, no interest in sexual behavior.  Loss of libido proceptivity.  Like in clinical depression.  One of the defining symptoms of clinical depression: loss of libido proceptivity.

meso-limbic dopamine system, central to the reinforcing aspects of sexual behavior

dopamine system not so much about reward as about anticipation
driving goal-directed behavior

show a man a picture of attractive woman making eye contact, dopamine system activates
show a man a picture of unattractive woman looking away, dopamine system activates

monkey gets a reward after 10 lever presses
dopamine level goes up in monkey when he presses the button, not when he gets the reward
50% of the time, randomly, monkey gets a reward after 10 lever presses "maybe"
dopamine level goes thru the roof
"intermittent reinforcement"
25% or 75% you get some smaller increase in dopamine
50% gets maximum dopamine, therefore maximum goal-directed bahavior
like in vegas, make it seem like 50% probability to get maximum goal-directed behavior

"a relationship is the price you pay for the anticipation of it"

pair-bonding, d1, d2 receptors
dopamine receptor subtypes
d1
d2
in monogamous species, right after mating, when a pair-bond is first formed, d2 goes down, d1 goes up
if you drive down the d2 levels before mating, they don't form a pair-bond
if you prevent the drop in d2, or prevent the rise in d1, they will pair-bond and 8 minutes later go pair-bond with somebody else
d1 seems to mediate the monogamous features of the pair-bond

you have a beloved
put you in a brain scanner
show photos of people you know, with subliminal photos of your beloved
knowing your beloved for 2.5 weeks, the photos stimulate the dopamine system
after 5 years, the photos stimulate anterior singulate, the empathy comfort system


