Capabilities of ai, super human
Split into multiple copies (Michael Keaton)
Reprogram oneself

More testosterone
Less Cortisol
Neuroplasticity

Pleasure pain software

turing test applied to politicians

We don't have a clock in our brains, but in fact we do create clocks. We organize daily monthly annual routines.

nlp
https://towardsdatascience.com/conversational-ai-design-build-a-contextual-assistant-part-3-80ec342e86ac
Now, Google is going further: Google expects its BERT systems to factor into about one in ten search results - a significant proportion for a technology that was published as a research paper less than a year ago. 
What is BERT and why does this matter?: BERT, short for Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers, was released by Google in October 2018, and quickly generated attention by getting impressive scores on a range of different tasks, ranging from question-answering to language inference. BERT is part of a crop of recent NLP models (GPT, GPT2, ULMFiT, roBERTa, etc) that have all demonstrated significant performance improvements over prior systems, leading to some researchers saying that NLP is having its "ImageNet moment". 

biology of romance
Watch "Jordan Peterson: Eye Contact and Attraction" on YouTube
https://youtu.be/PsFb0CYnnWM

https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.13406
Generalization of Reinforcement Learners with Working and Episodic Memory

SLAM = Simultaneous Localization and Mapping. That is just big grammar for a robot constantly using GPS/Assisted GPS, and a few other Algorithms, to 'learn' an unfamiliar terrain, while at the same time maintaining a relatively accurate sense of positioning by triangulation.

Relative sizes of neurotransmitters and neurons.

Watch "Alan Watts: All Do-Gooders Are Troublemakers [RE-UPLOAD & EXTENDED]" on YouTube
https://youtu.be/Tdih-UUJ3PA

amino acid peptide polypeptide protein folding amino acid side chain 

Self help, Self improvement, Louise hay
Pop psychology
Motivational speaking

Marshall Rosenberg
judges violence as bad, compassion as good
Anger, depression guilt shame
Anger put on someone else
depression guilt shame put on oneself
Power over someone - reward, punishment
Power with someone - increases their desire to contribute to our well-being
Love is not a feeling, it is a need
To observe without evaluating is the highest form of human intelligence. -Krishnamurti

Hunger, satiation
Two thermostats, one to start eating, one to stop eating.

But...
How do the hormones translate to action?

Low blood sugar.
Desire is created.
Activity engaged.

https://youtu.be/QmZf4DA61Xk 
Protons and neutrons are made of quarks, up-quarks and down-quarks.
The quantum theory crowd became the string theory crowd. they were trying to make Einstein submit to Bohr.  They have produced nothing no product all their promises unfulfilled. 

date of first iphone: June 29, 2007


humanity, personality

aesthetic values

creativity
 * openness to experience

Create versus steal

Creativity versus theft

Theft. An example of human on human violence.
