====== Thermodynamics ======
Thermodynamics

Scottish physicist Lord Kelvin was the first to formulate a concise definition of thermodynamics in 1854:

Thermo-dynamics is the subject of the relation of heat to forces acting between contiguous parts of bodies, and the relation of heat to electrical agency.

All matter is in motion at the molecular level, which helps define the three major phases of matter found on Earth. At one extreme is a gas, whose molecules exert little attraction toward one another, and are therefore in constant motion at a high rate of speed. At the other end of the phase continuum (with liquids somewhere in the middle) are solids. Because they are close together, solid particles move very little, and instead of moving in relation to one another, they merely vibrate in place. But they do move.

Absolute zero, or 0K on the Kelvin scale of temperature, is the point at which all molecular motion stops entirely—or at least, it virtually stops. (In fact, absolute zero is defined as the temperature at which the motion of the average atom or molecule is zero.) As stated earlier, Carnot's engine achieves perfect efficiency if its lowest temperature is the same as absolute zero; but the second law of thermodynamics shows that a perfectly efficient machine is impossible. This means that absolute zero is an unreachable extreme, rather like matter exceeding the speed of light, also an impossibility.

The Laws of Thermodynamics

for instance, why a refrigerator or air conditioner must have an external source of energy to move heat in a direction opposite to its normal flow.

1791, Swiss physicist Pierre Prevost (1751-1839) put forth his theory of exchanges, stating correctly that all bodies radiate heat. Hence, as noted earlier, there is no such thing as "cold": when one holds snow in one's hand, cold does not flow from the snow into the hand; rather, heat flows from the hand to the snow.

1798, American-British physicist named Benjamin Thompson, Count Rumford (1753) was boring a cannon with a blunt drill when he noticed that this action generated a great deal of heat. This led him to question the prevailing wisdom, which maintained that heat was a fluid form of matter; instead, Thompson began to suspect that heat must arise from some form of motion.


1824, French physicist and engineer Sadi Carnot (1796-1832). Though he published only one scientific work, Reflections on the Motive Power of Fire (1824), this treatise caused a great stir in the European scientific community. In it, Carnot made the first attempt at a scientific definition of work, describing it as "weight lifted through a height." Even more important was his proposal for a highly efficient steam engine.

A steam engine, like a modern-day internal combustion engine, is an example of a larger class of machine called heat engine. A heat engine absorbs heat at a high temperature, performs mechanical work, and, as a result, gives off heat a lower temperature. (The reason why that temperature must be lower is established in the second law of thermodynamics.)

For its era, the steam engine was what the computer is today: representing the cutting edge in technology, it was the central preoccupation of those interested in finding new ways to accomplish old tasks. Carnot, too, was fascinated by the steam engine, and was determined to help overcome its disgraceful inefficiency: in operation, a steam engine typically lost as much as 95% of its heat energy.

In his Reflections, Carnot proposed that the maximum efficiency of any heat engine was equal to (T H -T L )/T H , where T H is the highest operating temperature of the machine, and T L the lowest. In order to maximize this value, T L has to be absolute zero, which is impossible to reach, as was later illustrated by the third law of thermodynamics.

In attempting to devise a law for a perfectly efficient machine, Carnot inadvertently proved that such a machine is impossible. Yet his work influenced improvements in steam engine design, leading to levels of up to 80% efficiency. In addition, Carnot's studies influenced Kelvin—who actually coined the term "thermodynamics"—and others.
THE FIRST LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS.

1840s, Julius Robert Mayer (1814-1878), a German physicist, published several papers in which he expounded the principles known today as the conservation of energy and the first law of thermodynamics. As discussed earlier, the conservation of energy shows that within a system isolated from all outside factors, the total amount of energy remains the same, though transformations of energy from one form to another take place.

The first law of thermodynamics states this fact in a somewhat different manner. As with the other laws, there is no definitive phrasing; instead, there are various versions, all of which say the same thing. One way to express the law is as follows: Because the amount of energy in a system remains constant, it is impossible to perform work that results in an energy output greater than the energy input. For a heat engine, this means that the work output of the engine, combined with its change in internal energy, is equal to its heat input. Most heat engines, however, operate in a cycle, so there is no net change in internal energy.

Earlier, it was stated that a refrigerator extracts two or three times as much heat from its inner compartment as the amount of energy required to run it. On the surface, this seems to contradict the first law: isn't the refrigerator putting out more energy than it received? But the heat it extracts is only part of the picture, and not the most important part from the perspective of the first law.

A regular heat engine, such as a steam or internal-combustion engine, pulls heat from a high-temperature reservoir to a low-temperature reservoir, and, in the process, work is accomplished. Thus, the hot steam from the high-temperature reservoir makes possible the accomplishment of work, and when the energy is extracted from the steam, it condenses in the low-temperature reservoir as relatively cool water.

A refrigerator, on the other hand, reverses this process, taking heat from a low-temperature reservoir (the evaporator inside the cooling compartment) and pumping it to a high-temperature reservoir outside the refrigerator. Instead of producing a work output, as a steam engine does, it requires a work input—the energy supplied via the wall outlet. Of course, a refrigerator does produce an "output," by cooling the food inside, but the work it performs in doing so is equal to the energy supplied for that purpose.


THE SECOND LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS.

1850, Just a few years after Mayer's exposition of the first law, another German physicist, Rudolph Julius Emanuel Clausius (1822-1888) published an early version of the second law of thermodynamics. In an 1850 paper, Clausius stated that "Heat cannot, of itself, pass from a colder to a hotter body." 

1865  He refined this 15 years later, introducing the concept of entropy—the tendency of natural systems toward breakdown, and specifically, the tendency for the energy in a system to be dissipated.

The second law of thermodynamics begins from the fact that the natural flow of heat is always from a high-temperature reservoir to a low-temperature reservoir. As a result, no engine can be constructed that simply takes heat from a source and performs an equivalent amount of work: some of the heat will always be lost. In other words, it is impossible to build a perfectly efficient engine.

Though its relation to the first law is obvious, inasmuch as it further defines the limitations of machine output, the second law of thermodynamics is not derived from the first. Elsewhere in this volume, the first law of thermodynamics—stated as the conservation of energy law—is discussed in depth, and, in that context, it is in fact necessary to explain how the behavior of machines in the real world does not contradict the conservation law.

Even though they mean the same thing, the first law of thermodynamics and the conservation of energy law are expressed in different ways. The first law of thermodynamics states that "the glass is half empty," whereas the conservation of energy law shows that "the glass is half full." The thermodynamics law emphasizes the bad news: that one can never get more energy out of a machine than the energy put into it. Thus, all hopes of a perpetual motion machine were dashed. The conservation of energy, on the other hand, stresses the good news: that energy is never lost.

In this context, the second law of thermodynamics delivers another dose of bad news: though it is true that energy is never lost, the energy available for work output will never be as great as the energy put into a system. A car engine, for instance, cannot transform all of its energy input into usable horsepower; some of the energy will be used up in the form of heat and sound. Though energy is conserved, usable energy is not.

Indeed, the concept of entropy goes far beyond machines as people normally understand them. Entropy explains why it is easier to break something than to build it—and why, for each person, the machine called the human body will inevitably break down and die, or cease to function, someday.


THE THIRD LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS.

1905, The subject of entropy leads directly to the third law of thermodynamics, formulated by German chemist Hermann Walter Nernst (1864-1941) in 1905. The third law states that at the temperature of absolute zero, entropy also approaches zero. From this statement, Nernst deduced that absolute zero is therefore impossible to reach.

All matter is in motion at the molecular level, which helps define the three major phases of matter found on Earth. At one extreme is a gas, whose molecules exert little attraction toward one another, and are therefore in constant motion at a high rate of speed. At the other end of the phase continuum (with liquids somewhere in the middle) are solids. Because they are close together, solid particles move very little, and instead of moving in relation to one another, they merely vibrate in place. But they do move.

Absolute zero, or 0K on the Kelvin scale of temperature, is the point at which all molecular motion stops entirely—or at least, it virtually stops. (In fact, absolute zero is defined as the temperature at which the motion of the average atom or molecule is zero.) As stated earlier, Carnot's engine achieves perfect efficiency if its lowest temperature is the same as absolute zero; but the second law of thermodynamics shows that a perfectly efficient machine is impossible. This means that absolute zero is an unreachable extreme, rather like matter exceeding the speed of light, also an impossibility.

This does not mean that scientists do not attempt to come as close as possible to absolute zero, and indeed they have come very close. In 1993, physicists at the Helsinki University of Technology Low Temperature Laboratory in Finland used a nuclear demagnetization device to achieve a temperature of 2.8 · 10 −10 K, or 0.00000000028K. This means that a fragment equal to only 28 parts in 100 billion separated this temperature from absolute zero—but it was still above 0K. Such extreme low-temperature research has a number of applications, most notably with superconductors, materials that exhibit virtually no resistance to electrical current at very low temperatures.

Read more: http://www.scienceclarified.com/everyday/Real-Life-Physics-Vol-2/Thermodynamics-Real-life-applications.html#ixzz5rlBk4cGa

==== References ====

Wikipedia, "Thermodynamics", 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermodynamics, accessed 2019 May.

MIT Open Courseware, //5.60 Thermodynamics and Kinetics//, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/chemistry/5-60-thermodynamics-kinetics-spring-2008/, accessed 2019 May, [[Notes on MIT 5.60 Thermodynamics and Kinetics|Notes]]

Science Clarified, //Thermodynamics - Real-life Applications//, [[http://www.scienceclarified.com/everyday/Real-Life-Physics-Vol-2/Thermodynamics-Real-life-applications.html#ixzz5qJAvVlUC]], accessed 2019 June, [[Notes on Thermodynamics Real-life Applications|Notes]]